[docs] SDXL (#4428)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/using-diffusers/sdxl.md

# Stable Diffusion XL

> [[open-in-colab]]

Reviewer: Does the colab work?

Author: Notebook should work once its generated!

).to("cuda")

refiner = StableDiffusionXLImg2ImgPipeline.from_single_file(
    "./sd_xl_refiner_1.0.safetensors", torch_dtype=torch.float16, use_safetensors=True, variant="fp16"
).to("cuda")
```

## Text-to-image

For text-to-image, pass a text prompt:

```py
from diffusers import AutoPipeline
import torch

pipeline_text2image = AutoPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0", torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16", use_safetensors=True
).to("cuda")

prompt = "Astronaut in a jungle, cold color palette, muted colors, detailed, 8k"
image = pipeline(prompt=prompt).images[0]
```

<div class="flex justify-center">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/sdxl-text2img.png" alt="generated image of an astronaut in a jungle"/>
</div>

## Image-to-image

For image-to-image, SDXL works especially well with image sizes between 768x768 and 1024x1024. Pass an initial image, and a text prompt to condition the image with:

```py
from diffusers import AutoPipeline
from diffusers.utils import load_image

# use from_pipe to avoid consuming additional memory when loading a checkpoint

> pipeline = AutoPipeline.from_pipe(pipeline_text2image).to("cuda")

Author: Good catch!

</div>

## Inpainting

For inpainting, you'll need the original image and a mask of what you want to replace in the original image. Create a prompt to describe what you want to replace the masked area with.

```py
from diffusers import AutoPipeline
from diffusers.utils import load_image

# use from_pipe to avoid consuming additional memory when loading a checkpoint
pipeline = AutoPipeline.from_pipe(pipeline_text2image).to("cuda")

img_url = "https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/sdxl-text2img.png"
mask_url = "https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/sdxl-inpaint-mask.png"

init_image = load_image(img_url).convert("RGB")
mask_image = load_image(mask_url).convert("RGB")

prompt = "A deep sea diver floating"
image = pipe(prompt=prompt, image=init_image, mask_image=mask_image, strength=0.85, guidance_scale=12.5).images[0]
```

<div class="flex justify-center">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/sdxl-inpaint.png" alt="generated image of a deep sea diver in a jungle"/>
</div>

> ## Refine image quality

Author: I think it might be better to focus on the "tasks" first and then dive deeper into the model's features (like the refiner) afterward.

SDXL includes a [refiner model](https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-refiner-1.0) specialized in denoising low-noise stage images to generate higher-quality images from the base model. There are two ways to use the refiner:

1. use the base and refiner model as an [*ensemble of expert denoisers*](https://research.nvidia.com/labs/dir/eDiff-I/) (❤️ thanks to the following contributors for proposing and implementing this method: [SytanSD](https://github.com/SytanSD), [bghira](https://github.com/bghira), [Birch-san](https://github.com/Birch-san), [AmericanPresidentJimmyCarter](https://github.com/AmericanPresidentJimmyCarter))
2. use the refiner with [SDEdit](https://huggingface.co/papers/2108.01073) after running the base model (this is how SDXL is originally trained)

### Ensemble of expert denoisers

> The ensemble of expert denoisers approach requires less overall denoising steps versus passing the base model's output to the refiner model, so it should be significantly faster to run. However, you won't be able to inspect the base model's output because it is heavily denoised.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ensemble of expert denoisers approach requires less overall denoising steps versus passing the base model's output to the refiner model, so it should be significantly faster to run. However, you won't be able to inspect the base model's output because it still contains a large amount of noise.
```

<Tip>

The `denoising_end` and `denoising_start` parameters should be a float between 0 and 1. These parameters are represented as a proportion of discrete timesteps as defined by the scheduler. If you're also using the `strength` parameter, it'll be ignored because the number of denoising steps is determined by the discrete timesteps the model is trained on and the declared fractional cutoff.

</Tip>

Let's set `denoising_end=0.8` so the base model performs the first 80% of denoising the **high-noise** timesteps and set `denoising_start=0.8` so the refiner model performs the last 20% of denoising the **low-noise** timesteps. The base model output should be in **latent** space instead of a PIL image.

```py
prompt = "A majestic lion jumping from a big stone at night"

image = base(
    prompt=prompt,
    num_inference_steps=40,
    denoising_end=0.8,
    output_type="latent",
).images
image = refiner(
    prompt=prompt,
    num_inference_steps=40,
    denoising_start=0.8,
    image=image,

> ).images[0]

Reviewer 2: Actually, we should maybe simplify this to offer a one-step api and avoid decoding/encoding images (just use the latents). But that's a different discussion.

```

<div class="flex gap-4">
  <div>
    <img class="rounded-xl" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/lion_base.png" alt="generated image of a lion on a rock at night" />
    <figcaption class="mt-2 text-center text-sm text-gray-500">base model</figcaption>
  </div>
  <div>
    <img class="rounded-xl" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/lion_refined.png" alt="generated image of a lion on a rock at night in higher quality" />
    <figcaption class="mt-2 text-center text-sm text-gray-500">ensemble of expert denoisers</figcaption>
  </div>
</div>

> For inpainting, use the [`StableDiffusionXLInpaintPipeline`]:

Reviewer 2: This is a quite specialized use of the refiner, in my opinion. Maybe add a sub-section header and intro saying we can even use the refiner for in-painting by creating a mask on the desired area of the base image.

    "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-refiner-1.0",
    text_encoder_2=pipe.text_encoder_2,
    vae=pipe.vae,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
    use_safetensors=True,
    variant="fp16",
).to("cuda")

img_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CompVis/latent-diffusion/main/data/inpainting_examples/overture-creations-5sI6fQgYIuo.png"
mask_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CompVis/latent-diffusion/main/data/inpainting_examples/overture-creations-5sI6fQgYIuo_mask.png"

init_image = load_image(img_url).convert("RGB")
mask_image = load_image(mask_url).convert("RGB")

prompt = "A majestic tiger sitting on a bench"
num_inference_steps = 75
high_noise_frac = 0.7

image = base(
    prompt=prompt,
    image=init_image,
    mask_image=mask_image,
    num_inference_steps=num_inference_steps,
    denoising_end=high_noise_frac,
    output_type="latent",
).images
image = refiner(
    prompt=prompt,
    image=image,
    mask_image=mask_image,
    num_inference_steps=num_inference_steps,
    denoising_start=high_noise_frac,
).images[0]
```

This ensemble of expert denoisers method works well for all available schedulers!

### Refine fully-denoised base image

> SDXL gets a boost in image quality by using the refiner model to add additional high-quality details to the fully-denoised image from the base model, similar to image-to-image generation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SDXL gets a boost in image quality by using the refiner model to add additional high-quality details to the fully-denoised image from the base model, in an image-to-image setting.
```

I think it helps people connect the dots better by being more forward.

```py
from diffusers import StableDiffusionXLPipeline
import torch

pipeline = StableDiffusionXLPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0", torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16", use_safetensors=True
).to("cuda")

prompt = "Astronaut in a jungle, cold color palette, muted colors, detailed, 8k"
image = pipeline(prompt=prompt, crops_coords_top_left=(256,0)).images[0]
```

<div class="flex justify-center">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/sdxl-cropped.png" alt="generated image of an astronaut in a jungle, slightly cropped"/>
</div>

## Optimizations

> SDXL is a large model, and you may need to optimize your memory to get it to run on hardware. Here are some tips to save memory and speed up inference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SDXL is a large model, and you may need to optimize memory to get it to run on your hardware. Here are some tips to save memory and speed up inference.
```

```py
prompt = "Astronaut in a jungle, cold color palette, muted colors, detailed, 8k"

image = base(prompt=prompt, output_type="latent" if use_refiner else "pil").images[0]
```

Pass the generated image to the refiner model:

```py
image = refiner(prompt=prompt, image=image[None, :]).images[0]
```

<div class="flex gap-4">
  <div>
    <img class="rounded-xl" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/diffusers/docs-images/resolve/main/sd_xl/init_image.png" alt="generated image of an astronaut riding a green horse on Mars" />
    <figcaption class="mt-2 text-center text-sm text-gray-500">base model</figcaption>
  </div>
  <div>
    <img class="rounded-xl" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/diffusers/docs-images/resolve/main/sd_xl/refined_image.png" alt="higher quality generated image of an astronaut riding a green horse on Mars" />
    <figcaption class="mt-2 text-center text-sm text-gray-500">base model + refiner model</figcaption>
  </div>
</div>

For inpainting, load the refiner model in the [`StableDiffusionXLInpaintPipeline`], remove the `denoising_end` and `denoising_start` parameters, and choose a smaller number of inference steps for the refiner.

## Micro-conditioning

> SDXL adds two addition conditioning techniques, which are referred to as *micro-conditioning*. The model is conditioned on image size so at inference, you can set a desired resolution for the generated image. The second conditioning is based on cropping parameters, allowing you to control how the generated image is cropped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SDXL training used several additional conditioning signals, which are referred to as *micro-conditioning*. These include original image size, target image size and cropping parameters. These signals can be used at inference time to create high-quality, centered image results.
```

<Tip>

> Size and crop-conditioning parameters can be used together to generate high-resolution images that are centered on a subject. These micro-conditionings and negative micro-conditionings are available in the [`StableDiffusionXLPipeline`], [`StableDiffusionXLImg2ImgPipeline`], [`StableDiffusionXLInpaintPipeline`], and [`StableDiffusionXLControlNetPipeline`].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use both micro-conditioning and negative micro-conditioning parameters thanks to classifier-free guidance. They are available in the [`StableDiffusionXLPipeline`], [`StableDiffusionXLImg2ImgPipeline`], [`StableDiffusionXLInpaintPipeline`], and [`StableDiffusionXLControlNetPipeline`].
```

</Tip>

### Size conditioning

> Size conditioning takes advantage of what SDXL has learned about image features at different resolutions during training to generate higher quality images during inference. You can experiment with this by adjusting the [`original_size`](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/api/pipelines/stable_diffusion/stable_diffusion_xl#diffusers.StableDiffusionXLPipeline.__call__.original_size) and [`target_size`](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/api/pipelines/stable_diffusion/stable_diffusion_xl#diffusers.StableDiffusionXLPipeline.__call__.target_size) parameters. By default, both parameters are set to 1024 to generate better images. If your `original_size` and `target_size` don't match, then the image is either down or upsampled to match the `target_size`.

Reviewer 2: This is not how it works, conditioning only carries information about the data used during training and no resizing is used. I'd suggest something like:

```suggestion
If the source images in the training dataset are too small, we can either ignore them, or resize them to match the desired size. Small images account for almost 40% of the total training data used to train SDXL, so the authors decided to upscale and use them for training. However, the model also receives "original size" conditioning, which is just the information about the resolutions of the images in the training batch. This way, the model learns that upscaling artifacts are not supposed to be present in high-resolution images. At inference time, we can use [`original_size`](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/api/pipelines/stable_diffusion/stable_diffusion_xl#diffusers.StableDiffusionXLPipeline.__call__.original_size) to indicate the original resolution. If we use the recommended value of `(1024, 1024)`, the model will produce images more similar to the 1024x1024 images in the dataset, which in general will be higher quality than lower-resolution ones. If you use a low resolution, such as `(256, 256)`, the model will still produce 1024x1024 images, but it will try to _mimic_ the appearance of low-res images in the dataset: simpler patterns and blurring are to be expected!

The [`target_size`](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/api/pipelines/stable_diffusion/stable_diffusion_xl#diffusers.StableDiffusionXLPipeline.__call__.target_size), on the other hand, was used when the model was fine-tuned to support various aspect ratios, so it's intended to be used in that context too. For example, if you use `(1024, 1024)`, you'll get images that resemble the composition of square images in the dataset. We recommend you set the same value for this conditioning parameter as the resolution you are trying to create, but you are free to experiment with other options!
```

Feel free to simplify if it's too long.

🤗 Diffusers also lets you specify negative conditions about an image's size to steer generation away from certain image resolutions:

```py
from diffusers import StableDiffusionXLPipeline
import torch

pipe = StableDiffusionXLPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0", torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16", use_safetensors=True
).to("cuda")

prompt = "Astronaut in a jungle, cold color palette, muted colors, detailed, 8k"
image = pipe(
    prompt=prompt,
    negative_original_size=(512, 512),
    negative_target_size=(1024, 1024),
).images[0]
```

<div class="flex flex-col justify-center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/diffusers/docs-images/resolve/main/sd_xl/negative_conditions.png"/>
  <figcaption class="text-center">Images negative conditioned on image resolutions of (128, 128), (256, 256), and (512, 512).</figcaption>
</div>

### Crop conditioning

> Images generated from previous Stable Diffusion models may sometimes appear to be randomly cropped due to how the model is trained. By conditioning SDXL on the cropping parameters, SDXL is able to generate images that are more centered and subjects in the images aren't randomly cut off. You can control the amount of cropping during inference with the [`crops_coords_top_left`](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/api/pipelines/stable_diffusion/stable_diffusion_xl#diffusers.StableDiffusionXLPipeline.__call__.crops_coords_top_left) parameter. By default, `crops_coords_top_left` is (0, 0) for a centered image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Images generated by previous Stable Diffusion models may sometimes appear to be cropped. This is because images are actually cropped during the training process so that all the images in a batch have the same size. By conditioning on crop coordinates, the model _learns_ that no cropping (coordinates `(0, 0)`) usually correlates with centered subjects and complete faces. Therefore, we recommend you use `(0, 0)` as the go-to value for the [`crops_coords_top_left`](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/api/pipelines/stable_diffusion/stable_diffusion_xl#diffusers.StableDiffusionXLPipeline.__call__.crops_coords_top_left) parameter. You can experiment with different settings if you want to achieve off-centered compositions!
```

    "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0", torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16", use_safetensors=True
).to("cuda")

prompt = "Astronaut in a jungle, cold color palette, muted colors, detailed, 8k"
image = pipeline(prompt=prompt, crops_coords_top_left=(256,0)).images[0]
```

<div class="flex justify-center">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/sdxl-cropped.png" alt="generated image of an astronaut in a jungle, slightly cropped"/>
</div>

You can also specify negative cropping coordinates to steer generation away from certain cropping parameters:

```py
from diffusers import StableDiffusionXLPipeline
import torch

pipe = StableDiffusionXLPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0", torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16", use_safetensors=True
).to("cuda")

prompt = "Astronaut in a jungle, cold color palette, muted colors, detailed, 8k"
image = pipe(
    prompt=prompt,
    negative_original_size=(512, 512),
    negative_crops_coords_top_left=(0, 0),
    negative_target_size=(1024, 1024),
).images[0]
```

## Use a different prompt for each text-encoder

> SDXL uses two text-encoders so it is possible to pass a different prompt to each text-encoder which can [improve quality](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/issues/4004#issuecomment-1627764201). Pass your original prompt to `prompt` and the second prompt to `prompt_2` (use `negative_prompt` and `negative_prompt_2` if you're using a negative prompt):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SDXL uses two text-encoders, so it is possible to pass a different prompt to each text-encoder. This is another knob you can use for flexibility or to [improve quality](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/issues/4004#issuecomment-1627764201). Pass your original prompt to `prompt` and the second prompt to `prompt_2` (use `negative_prompt` and `negative_prompt_2` if you're using negative prompts):
```
